.TH KEYPRESS 1 "2025-03-01" "1.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
keypress \- layout-aware X11 keyboard automation tool
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B keypress.py
[\fB\-h\fR]
[\fB\-c\fR \fICOMMAND\fR]
[\fB\-d\fR \fIDELAY\fR]
[\fB\-t\fR \fITYPING_DELAY\fR]
[\fB\-w\fR \fIWINDOW\fR]
[\fB\-n\fR]
[\fB\-e\fR]
[\fB\-a\fR \fINAME=VALUE\fR]
[\fB\-\-compose-key\fR \fIKEY\fR]
[\fB\-\-list-windows\fR]
[\fB\-\-attach\fR \fIPID\fR]
[\fB\-\-attach-window-id\fR \fIWID\fR]
[\fB\-\-debug\fR]
.I program
.RI [ script ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B keypress.py
is a keyboard automation tool that respects your system keyboard layout, unlike xdotool which uses hardcoded US keycodes. It properly handles multi-column keymaps, AltGr symbols, and provides both system-layout and emulator modes.

The tool was created to solve the problem of automating keyboard input on non-US layouts (Finnish, German, Swedish, etc.) where symbols like brackets and backslashes are in different keymap columns than US layouts expect.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-h, \-\-help
Show help message and exit.
.TP
.BI \-c\  COMMAND \fR,\ \fB\-\-command\  COMMAND
Execute a single command. Can be repeated for multiple commands. If no script file is provided, at least one \fB\-c\fR option is required.
.TP
.BI \-d\  DELAY \fR,\ \fB\-\-delay\  DELAY
Startup delay in seconds before searching for the program window. Default: 2.0. Increase if window detection fails.
.TP
.BI \-t\  TYPING_DELAY \fR,\ \fB\-\-typing\-delay\  TYPING_DELAY
Delay between individual keystrokes in seconds. Default: 0.03 (30ms). Increase for slower typing, decrease for faster.
.TP
.BI \-w\  WINDOW \fR,\ \fB\-\-window\  WINDOW
Window name pattern to search for. Recommended for reliable window detection. The pattern is case-insensitive and matches partial names.
.TP
.B \-n, \-\-no-wait
Exit immediately after executing the script instead of waiting for the program to exit. Useful for background processes.
.TP
.B \-e, \-\-emulator-mode
Use hardcoded US keyboard layout instead of system layout. Required for emulators (DOSBox-X, VICE, MAME) that internally expect US keyboard layout.
.TP
.BI \-a\  NAME=VALUE \fR,\ \fB\-\-assign\  NAME=VALUE
Set a script variable. Can be repeated for multiple variables. Variables are referenced in scripts as ${NAME} and ${NAME:-default}.
.TP
.BI \-\-compose-key\  KEY
Set the compose key for dead keys and compose sequences. The key is specified by X11 keysym name (e.g. Alt_R, Multi_key). Default: Alt_R.
.TP
.B \-\-list-windows
List all visible windows and exit. Useful for finding window names, IDs, and PIDs for use with \fB\-w\fR, \fB\-\-attach\fR, or \fB\-\-attach-window-id\fR.
.TP
.BI \-\-attach\  PID
Attach to an already-running process by PID instead of launching a new one. The tool searches for a window belonging to the specified process.
.TP
.BI \-\-attach-window-id\  WID
Attach to an already-running window by its window ID. WID is a hexadecimal number (e.g. 0x2000001). Use \fB\-\-list-windows\fR to find window IDs.
.TP
.B \-\-debug
Enable debug output showing detected keyboard mapping. Displays which characters are cached and their keycodes/modifiers.
.SH POSITIONAL ARGUMENTS
.TP
.I program
Program to launch. If the program command contains arguments or spaces, enclose in quotes: "dosbox-x -c 'mount c ~/dos'". Not required if \fB\-\-attach\fR or \fB\-\-attach-window-id\fR is used.
.TP
.I script
Path to script file containing commands to execute. Optional if \fB\-c\fR is used.
.SH SCRIPT FILE FORMAT
Each line in the script file is typed followed by Enter, unless special commands are used.
.SS Regular Text
.nf
dir /p
echo "Hello"
path=c:\dos
.fi
.SS Special Keys
Special keys are enclosed in angle brackets:
.nf
<Esc>              Escape key
<Tab>              Tab key
<Backspace>        Backspace
<Delete>           Delete key
<Return>           Enter/Return
<Space>            Space bar
<F1> ... <F12>     Function keys
<Up> <Down>        Arrow keys
<Left> <Right>
<Home> <End>       Navigation keys
<PageUp> <PageDown>
.fi
.SS Key Combinations
Use + to combine keys:
.nf
<Ctrl+c>           Ctrl+C (copy)
<Ctrl+v>           Ctrl+V (paste)
<Alt+F4>           Alt+F4 (close)
<Shift+Insert>     Shift+Insert
<Ctrl+Alt+Del>     Three-key combo
.fi
.SS Variables
Variables are set via the command line with \fB\-a\fR and referenced in scripts:
.nf
${VAR}             Insert value of VAR
${VAR:-default}    Insert value of VAR or "default" if not set
.fi
.SS Conditionals
Conditionally include script blocks:
.nf
<if:eq("USER","admin")>root</if>
<if:not:var_defined("MODE")>default mode<else>custom mode</if>
<if:window_exists("leafpad")><Alt+F4></if>
<if:clipboard_empty>empty<else>has content</if>
<if:true>always<else>never</if>
<if:not:false>also always</if>
.fi
The \fB<else>\fR branch is optional. Supported conditions are listed in the \fBSCRIPT CONDITIONS\fR section below.
.SS While Loops
Repeat a block while a condition is true:
.nf
<while:eq("MODE","retry")><Tab><Return></while>
<while:timeout:30:window_exists("dialog")><wait:1></while>
.fi
The \fBtimeout:N:\fR prefix limits execution to N seconds. The loop exits when the condition becomes false or the timeout is reached.
.SS Break
Exit the current loop immediately:
.nf
<while:window_exists("dialog")>
<if:eq("STATUS","done")><break></if>
<wait:1>
</while>
.fi
.SS Clipboard Commands
Interact with the X11 clipboard:
.nf
<clipboard:get>       Insert current clipboard text
<clipboard:set:text>    Set clipboard to "text"
.fi
.SS Loop Blocks
Repeat a block of script lines N times using \fB<for:N>\fR and \fB</for>\fR:
.nf
<for:3>
<Tab>
<Enter>
</for>
.fi
N must be an integer >= 1.  Loops may be nested.
A missing \fB</for>\fR or an invalid count causes keypress.py to exit with
an error message.
.SS Special Commands
.nf
<wait:2>           Wait 2 seconds
<wait:0.5>         Wait 500 milliseconds
<nowait>           Don't press Enter after previous line
# comment          Comment line (ignored)
.fi
.SH SCRIPT CONDITIONS
Conditions are used in \fB<if:>\fR and \fB<while:>\fR blocks.

.TP
.BI eq(" NAME "," value ")
True if the variable NAME equals the given value.
.TP
.BI ne(" NAME "," value ")
True if the variable NAME does not equal the given value.
.TP
.BI var_defined(" NAME ")
True if the variable NAME has been set (via \fB\-a\fR).
.TP
.BI window_exists(" pattern ")
True if a window matching the pattern exists.
.TP
.B clipboard_empty
True if the X11 clipboard contains no text.
.TP
.B true
Always true.
.TP
.B false
Always false.
.TP
.BI not: condition
Negates any condition. For example, \fBnot:var_defined("MODE")\fR or \fBnot:eq("USER","guest")\fR.
.SH EXAMPLES
.SS Normal Applications
Automate text editor with system keyboard layout:
.nf
keypress.py "leafpad" script.txt -w leafpad
keypress.py "gedit" commands.txt -w gedit -d 3
.fi
.SS Emulators
Automate DOSBox with US layout (required):
.nf
keypress.py "dosbox-x" dos.txt -w DOSBox --emulator-mode
keypress.py "vice" game.txt -w VICE -e -d 5
.fi
.SS Quick Commands
Execute without script file:
.nf
keypress.py "xterm" -c "ls -la" -c "pwd" -w xterm
keypress.py "leafpad" -c "Hello" -c "<Ctrl+s>" -w leafpad -n
.fi
.SS Attach to Running Process
Attach to an already-running window by PID or window ID:
.nf
keypress.py --attach 1234 -c "hello" -w leafpad
keypress.py --attach-window-id 0x2000001 -c "<Return>"
.fi
.SS List Windows
List visible windows for debugging or finding targets:
.nf
keypress.py --list-windows
.fi
.SS Variables and Conditionals
Use variables and conditionals in scripts:
.nf
keypress.py "leafpad" script.txt -a "USER=admin" -a "MODE=debug"
.fi
An example script using variables and conditionals:
.nf
# Wait for app to start
<wait:2>

# Conditional branch
<if:eq("MODE","debug")>debug mode active<else>release mode</if>

# Type username using variable
${USER}
<Tab>

# Type password
secret123
<Return>
.fi
.SS Debug Keyboard Layout
See what characters are detected:
.nf
keypress.py "leafpad" test.txt --debug
.fi
.SH MODES
.SS Normal Mode (Default)
Queries X11 keyboard mapping and respects your system layout (Finnish, German, Swedish, etc.). Properly handles AltGr symbols in extended keymap columns. Use for normal applications like text editors, terminals, browsers.
.SS Emulator Mode (\-\-emulator-mode)
Uses hardcoded US keyboard layout, ignoring system settings. Required for emulators (DOSBox-X, VICE, MAME) because they run DOS/games internally which expect US keyboard codes. Without this flag, symbols will be wrong in emulators.
.SH WINDOW DETECTION
The program searches for the target window in several ways:

.SS By PID (Default)
Searches for a window belonging to the launched process. Works for simple cases but may fail for complex applications.

.SS By Name Pattern (\-w)
Searches for a window whose title matches the pattern (case-insensitive, partial match). More reliable:
.nf
keypress.py "app" script.txt -w "Application Name"
.fi

Use \fBxdotool search --name ""\fR to list all windows and find the correct pattern.

.SS By Attachment (\-\-attach, \-\-attach-window-id)
Attaches to an already-running process or window instead of launching a new one. Useful for automating existing applications.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success
.TP
.B 1
Error (window not found, script file missing, invalid arguments, etc.)
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.Xmodmap
User keyboard mapping file (if present)
.TP
.I /usr/share/X11/xkb/
System keyboard layout definitions
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B DISPLAY
X11 display to connect to (default: :0)
.SH BUGS
.IP \(bu 2
Only works on X11, not Wayland
.IP \(bu 2
Unicode characters beyond your keymap not supported
.IP \(bu 2
Multi-monitor setups untested
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR dump_keymap.py (1),
.BR mouse.py (1),
.BR xdotool (1),
.BR xmodmap (1),
.BR setxkbmap (1),
.BR python-xlib (7)
.SH AUTHOR
EdgeOfAssembly <haxbox2000@gmail.com>
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 2025 EdgeOfAssembly. License GPLv3+: GNU GPL version 3 or later.
This is free software: you are free to change and redistribute it.
There is NO WARRANTY, to the extent permitted by law.
