.TH MOUSE 1 "2025-03-01" "1.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
mouse \- X11 mouse automation tool
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B mouse.py
[\fB\-h\fR]
[\fB\-c\fR \fICOMMAND\fR]
[\fB\-d\fR \fIDELAY\fR]
[\fB\-t\fR \fIEVENT_DELAY\fR]
[\fB\-w\fR \fIWINDOW\fR]
[\fB\-n\fR]
[\fB\-\-attach\fR \fIPID\fR]
[\fB\-\-attach-window-id\fR \fIWID\fR]
[\fB\-\-debug\fR]
.RI [ program ]
.RI [ script ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B mouse.py
is an X11 mouse automation tool that provides precise control over cursor movement, clicking, dragging, and scrolling. It is designed to complement \fBkeypress.py\fR for full GUI automation tasks.

The tool operates by sending X11 mouse events directly to the target window, allowing automation of interactions with any X11 application.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-h, \-\-help
Show help message and exit.
.TP
.BI \-c\  COMMAND \fR,\ \fB\-\-command\  COMMAND
Execute a single command. Can be repeated for multiple commands. If no script file is provided, at least one \fB\-c\fR option is required.
.TP
.BI \-d\  DELAY \fR,\ \fB\-\-delay\  DELAY
Startup delay in seconds before searching for the program window. Default: 2.0. Increase if window detection fails.
.TP
.BI \-t\  EVENT_DELAY \fR,\ \fB\-\-typing-delay\  EVENT_DELAY
Delay between individual mouse events in seconds. Default: 0.03 (30ms). Increase for slower transitions, decrease for faster.
.TP
.BI \-w\  WINDOW \fR,\ \fB\-\-window\  WINDOW
Window name pattern to search for. Recommended for reliable window detection. The pattern is case-insensitive and matches partial names.
.TP
.B \-n, \-\-no-wait
Exit immediately after executing the script instead of waiting for the program to exit. Useful for background processes.
.TP
.BI \-\-attach\  PID
Attach to an already-running process by PID instead of launching a new one. The tool searches for a window belonging to the specified process.
.TP
.BI \-\-attach-window-id\  WID
Attach to an already-running window by its window ID. WID is a hexadecimal number (e.g. 0x2000001).
.TP
.B \-\-debug
Enable debug output showing window detection and mouse event details.
.SH POSITIONAL ARGUMENTS
.TP
.I program
Program to launch. Not required if \fB\-\-attach\fR or \fB\-\-attach-window-id\fR is used.
.TP
.I script
Path to script file containing commands to execute. Optional if \fB\-c\fR is used.
.SH SCRIPT COMMANDS
All commands are enclosed in angle brackets.

.SS Clicks
.TP
.BI <click:x,y>
Left-click at the given coordinates relative to the target window.
.TP
.BI <rightclick:x,y>
Right-click at the given coordinates relative to the target window.
.TP
.BI <dblclick:x,y>
Double-click at the given coordinates relative to the target window.

.SS Movement and Drag
.TP
.BI <move:x,y>
Move the mouse cursor to the given coordinates without clicking, relative to the target window.
.TP
.BI <drag:x1,y1:x2,y2>
Click and hold at \fIx1,y1\fR, drag to \fIx2,y2\fR, and release.

.SS Scrolling
.TP
.BI <scroll:up:N>
Scroll the mouse wheel up by \fIN\fR units at the current cursor position.
.TP
.BI <scroll:down:N>
Scroll the mouse wheel down by \fIN\fR units at the current cursor position.

.SS Timing
.TP
.BI <wait:N>
Pause execution for \fIN\fR seconds. Fractional seconds are supported (e.g. 0.5 for 500 milliseconds).
.SH EXAMPLES
.SS Quick Click Commands
Click at specific coordinates in a running application:
.nf
mouse.py "leafpad" -c "<click:100,200>" -c "<wait:1>"
.fi

.SS Attach to Running Process
Attach to an existing window and interact with it:
.nf
mouse.py --attach leafpad -c "<click:500,300>"
.fi

.SS Script File Usage
Automate a sequence of mouse actions using a script file:
.nf
mouse.py "gedit" mouse_script.txt -w gedit
.fi

An example script file:
.nf
# Move cursor to toolbar
<move:50,30>

# Click toolbar button
<click:50,30>
<wait:0.5>

# Right-click in text area
<rightclick:200,150>
<wait:0.5>

# Scroll down in document
<scroll:down:5>
<wait:1>

# Drag to select text
<drag:100,100:300,100>
.fi

.SS Combined with Keypress
Use both \fBmouse.py\fR and \fBkeypress.py\fR together for full GUI automation:
.nf
keypress.py "gedit" -c "<Ctrl+a>" -w gedit
mouse.py "gedit" -c "<rightclick:200,200>" -w gedit
.fi
.SH WINDOW DETECTION
The program searches for the target window in several ways:

.SS By PID (Default)
Searches for a window belonging to the launched process. Works for simple cases but may fail for complex applications.

.SS By Name Pattern (\-w)
Searches for a window whose title matches the pattern (case-insensitive, partial match). More reliable:
.nf
mouse.py "app" script.txt -w "Application Name"
.fi

.SS By Attachment (\-\-attach, \-\-attach-window-id)
Attaches to an already-running process or window instead of launching a new one. Useful for automating existing applications.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success
.TP
.B 1
Error (window not found, script file missing, invalid arguments, etc.)
.SH DEPENDENCIES
Requires python3-xlib and an X11 display:
.nf
Debian/Ubuntu: apt install python3-xlib
Arch/Manjaro:  pacman -S python-xlib
Fedora:        dnf install python3-xlib
.fi
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B DISPLAY
X11 display to connect to (default: :0)
.SH BUGS
.IP \(bu 2
Only works on X11, not Wayland
.IP \(bu 2
Multi-monitor setups may require window-relative coordinates
.IP \(bu 2
Window decoration offsets may affect coordinate precision
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR keypress.py (1),
.BR dump_keymap.py (1),
.BR xdotool (1),
.BR xmodmap (1),
.BR python-xlib (7)
.SH AUTHOR
EdgeOfAssembly <haxbox2000@gmail.com>
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 2025 EdgeOfAssembly. License GPLv3+: GNU GPL version 3 or later.
This is free software: you are free to change and redistribute it.
There is NO WARRANTY, to the extent permitted by law.
